Wiki reorg: Edit Comparisons (#6394)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-comparisons.md

through a network of **sequencers**. This mechanism could include thousands of transactions in a
single rollup.

:::info Layer Two Definition

Layer two (L2) networks are popular as being the way forward for blockchain scalability by
off-loading the majority of computation from layer one (L1) networks. L2 solutions utilize the L1
network's security and functionality to build an additional layer that is often faster, reduces
fees, and solves other platform-specific issues. In many cases, L2 solutions focus on utilizing L1
blockspace efficiently and cost-effectively.

:::

In this section we explore the main differences in rollup technology between:

- Zero-knowledge rollups,
- Optimistic rollups, and
- Polkadot rollups (i.e. parachains).

Before diving into the differences between these rollup technologies, it is important to understand
the difference between non-interactive and interactive methods.

### Non-interactive vs. Interactive Rollup Methods

In the context of rollups, **interactive** and **non-interactive** methods refer to how the validity
of transactions or state changes is established between the rollup layer and the main blockchain
(L1).

> A non-interactive method relies on cryptographic proofs to validate transactions or state changes
> without requiring dispute resolution or interactive challenges. A prominent example are
> zero-knowledge proofs such as a zk-SNARK or zk-STARK is generated off-chain, proving that the
> transactions in a batch satisfy the rules of the protocol. This proofs are submitted to the L1 chain
> and verified without needing further interaction.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A non-interactive method relies on cryptographic proofs to validate transactions or state changes without requiring dispute resolution or interactive challenges. A prominent example is zero-knowledge proving mechanisms that operate off-chain, such as a zk-SNARK or zk-STARK. These protocols prove that the transactions in a batch satisfy the rules of the protocol. These proofs are submitted to the L1 chain
and verified without needing further interaction.
```

An interactive method involves a back-and-forth process between parties to validate transactions. A

> prominent example is fraud proofs, as used in optimistic rollups. If a dispute arises, a challenge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
prominent example is the usage of fraud proofs, as used in optimistic rollups. If a dispute arises, a challenge
```

| **Aspect**         | **Interactive**                                 | **Non-Interactive**                                                     |
| ------------------ | ----------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Mechanism**      | Back-and-forth dispute resolution.              | One-time proof submission and verification.                             |
| **Latency**        | Long finality due to challenge periods.         | Near-instant finality.                                                  |
| **Security Basis** | Economic incentives and monitoring.             | Cryptographic guarantees.                                               |
| **Complexity**     | Simpler to implement but requires monitoring.   | Computationally intensive and harder to build.                          |
| **Use Cases**      | Broad compatibility with existing applications. | Best for high-security applications where instant finality is critical. |

Both approaches serve different needs and trade-offs, depending on the balance between scalability,

> security, latency, and flexibility required.

Reviewer: Might be nice to add a note about where ELVES falls here (Interactive, but assumes the "pessimistic" case)

Author: added, thank you!

### Zero-knowledge Rollups

Zero-knowledge rollups (often called ZK rollups) are a _non-interactive_ method that utilizes
zero-knowledge proofs to compute the validity of a particular set of state changes. Whereas
optimistic rollups relied on fraud proofs, ZK rollups rely on cryptographic validation in the form
of ZK proofs.

Zero-knowledge rollups are significantly faster in finalization, as the cryptographic validity proof

> handles the nuance of ensuring a rollup is valid. However, the ZK rollups often suffer from
> performance due to their complexity and difficult implementation into resource-constrained
> environments. Because Turing completeness is also challenging to achieve due to this computational

Reviewer: ```suggestion
handles the nuance of ensuring a rollup is valid. However, the ZK rollups often suffer from a
performance perspective due to the complexity involved in proof generation and difficult implementation into resource-constrained environments. Because Turing completeness is also challenging to achieve due to this computational
```

overhead, their ability to be generalized (in terms of blockspace) is reduced. However, they have a
promising future in solving some of the problems of optimistic rollups and addressing secure
scalability.

### Optimistic Rollups

Optimistic rollups are an interactive scaling method for L1 blockchains. They assume
_optimistically_ that every proposed transaction is valid by default.

In the case of mitigating potentially invalid transactions, optimistic rollups introduce a
_challenge period_ during which participants may challenge a suspect rollup. A fraud-proving scheme
can be in place to allow for several _fraud proofs_ to be submitted. Those proofs could make the
rollup valid or invalid. During the challenge period, state changes may be disputed, resolved, or
included if no challenge is presented (and the required proofs are in place).

> Optimistic rollups are often used in the Ethereum ecosystem. [Optimism](https://www.optimism.io/)
> and [Arbitrium](https://bridge.arbitrum.io/) are optimistic EVM-based rollup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optimistic rollups are often used in the Ethereum ecosystem. [Optimism](https://www.optimism.io/)
and [Arbitrium](https://bridge.arbitrum.io/) are an example of an optimistic, EVM-based rollup.
```

guarantees native security and scalability for each of its parachains through the
[Parachains Protocol](./learn-parachains-protocol.md). Polkadot handles the coordination of data
from parachains into an aggregated, representative state, somewhat similar to L2 rollups.

Whereas rollups are considered solutions for L2 protocols, Polkadot include this functionality
natively through its [Parachains Protocol](./learn-parachains-protocol.md). The Parachains Protocol,
which is how Polkadot handles network's **sharding** is meant to accomplish the combined goals of
providing security, scalability, and availability.

It enables parachains to verify their collective state and communicate with one another. Parachains
have similarities to aspects of optimistic and ZK rollups, which are reflected in how Polkadot
handles the validity and availability of the parachain state. [Collators](./learn-collator.md), a
key part of Polkadot architecture, are in principle similar to sequencers, as collators pass data
with a proof-of-validity (PoV) function for liveness and communication with the relay chain.

Each shard, or parachain, is equipped with a unique state transition function (STF). This function

> ensures that communication to the relay chain remains valid. Each STF, called runtime, is written in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ensures that communication to the relay chain remains valid. Each STF, called runtime, is compiled to
```

protocols prove that the transactions in a batch satisfy the rules of the protocol. These proofs are
submitted to the L1 chain and verified without needing further interaction.

An interactive method involves a back-and-forth process between parties to validate transactions. A
prominent example is the usage of fraud proofs, as used in optimistic rollups. If a dispute arises,
a challenge mechanism is triggered, where a "prover" submits evidence (fraud proof) to demonstrate
that a transaction is invalid. This can require multiple steps, with both the challenger and
defender submitting data to the L1 chain.

Here below, the key differences between interactive and non-interactive methods.

| **Aspect**         | **Interactive**                                 | **Non-Interactive**                                                     |
| ------------------ | ----------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Mechanism**      | Back-and-forth dispute resolution.              | One-time proof submission and verification.                             |

> | **Latency**        | Long finality due to challenge periods.         | Near-instant finality.                                                  |

Reviewer 2: So this isn't really true. In practice, Polkadot has faster finality and zk rollups take hours to finalize. zksync for instance takes a whole day.

> | **Security Basis** | Economic incentives and monitoring.             | Cryptographic guarantees.                                               |

Reviewer 2: Crypto-economic? 😉

_optimistically_ that every proposed transaction is valid by default.

In the case of mitigating potentially invalid transactions, optimistic rollups introduce a
_challenge period_ during which participants may challenge a suspect rollup. A fraud-proving scheme
can be in place to allow for several _fraud proofs_ to be submitted. Those proofs could make the
rollup valid or invalid. During the challenge period, state changes may be disputed, resolved, or
included if no challenge is presented (and the required proofs are in place).

Optimistic rollups are often used in the Ethereum ecosystem. [Optimism](https://www.optimism.io/)
and [Arbitrium](https://bridge.arbitrum.io/) are an example of optimistic EVM-based rollups.

### Polkadot Rollups

Polkadot Rollups work similarly to optimistic rollups. They are an interactive method with fraud
proof mechanism. Very much like optimistic rollups and zk rollups are secured by Ethereum, Polkadot
rollups are secured by the Polkadot Relay Chain. The checking and fraud proof mechanics are
implemented on Polkadot, natively. [collators](./learn-collator.md), are in principle similar to

> sequencers, as they pass data with a proof-of-validity (PoV) function for liveness and communication

Reviewer 2: maybe worth it to add "block witness" or mention that Polkadot is a "stateless client" of parachains as these are more familiar terms in ethereum land

Author: yep, added

| **Security Model**           | Relies on cryptographic validity proofs, ensuring high security and no reliance on game-theoretic assumptions. | Relies on economic incentives and a challenge period to catch fraud. Optimistic assumption makes it less secure than ZK Rollups.                                             | "Cynical" model, where every transaction is checked by a subset of validators, with escalation and slashing in case of disputes.                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

> | **Scalability**              | High scalability, constrained by computational complexity of zk-SNARKs or zk-STARKs.                           | High, with parallelization, but limited by gas costs on L1 chains like Ethereum.                                                                                             | Inherently scalable through native execution sharding and parachains operating in parallel. [Pipelining](./learn-async-backing.md) and [core scheduling](./learn-agile-coretime.md) increase throughput and scalability for the single rollup. Execution sharding is enabled by multiple virtual cores using [coretime](./learn-agile-coretime.md). |

Reviewer 2: Disagree that zk rollups have "high scalability", they are only a single state machine and are only as scalable as the prover machine and computation requirement. Many zk-rollups disable cryptographic precompiles on mainnet as a result of the immense computational requirement for them

| **Interoperability**         | Limited interoperability, often restricted to compatible L1s.                                                  | Limited interoperability, often confined to the parent blockchain ecosystem. See the [comparison about interoperability](#interoperability-comparison) for more information. | Native interoperability through [XCM](./learn-xcm.md), allowing seamless communication between parachains having different logic. [Trustless bridges](./learn-bridges.md) can connect Polkadot to other blockchains.                                                                                                                                |

> | **State Transition Logic**   | General-purpose but constrained by zk-circuit implementation complexity.                                       | Supports arbitrary state transitions with assumptions of optimistic validity.                                                                                                | Each parachain can define its unique state transition function (STF), compiled to Wasm and validated per Parachain Protocol rules.                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer 2: Optimistic rollups can only support evm state transitions since they have to be checked in the ecm

---
id: learn-comparisons
title: Polkadot Comparisons
sidebar_label: Comparisons
description: Comparison between Polkadot and other Networks.
keywords:
  [
    comparisons,
    Polkadot,
    blockchain,
    rollups,
    polkadot,
    scalability,
    shared,
    security,
    parachain,
    ethereum,
  ]
slug: ../learn-comparisons
---

import DocCardList from '@theme/DocCardList';

## Rollup Comparison

**Rollups** are an L2 scaling solution. At the most basic level, a rollup L2 solution is responsible
for "rolling up" transactions by batching them before publishing them to the L1 chain, usually

> through a network of **sequencers**. This mechanism could include thousands of transactions in a

Reviewer 3: The sequencer's role is not necessarily publishing the Txs to the L1. In theory the role of sequencing Txs and publishing could be assumed by separate entities.

In practice today they're probably the same machine, but this is likely to change as rollups decentralize more.

Author: added

single rollup.

:::info Layer Two Definition

Layer two (L2) networks are popular as being the way forward for blockchain scalability by
off-loading the majority of computation from layer one (L1) networks. L2 solutions utilize the L1

> network's security and functionality to build an additional layer that is often faster, reduces

Reviewer 3: Functionality is not re-used.
One could launch an EVM or SVM or Move rollups that settle to Ethereum.

Author: corrected

- Zero-knowledge rollups,
- Optimistic rollups, and
- Polkadot rollups (i.e. parachains).

Before diving into the differences between these rollup technologies, it is important to understand
the difference between non-interactive and interactive methods.

### Non-interactive vs. Interactive Rollup Methods

In the context of rollups, **interactive** and **non-interactive** methods refer to how the validity
of transactions or state changes is established between the rollup layer and the main blockchain
(L1).

A non-interactive method relies on cryptographic proofs to validate transactions or state changes
without requiring dispute resolution or interactive challenges. A prominent example is
zero-knowledge proving mechanisms that operate off-chain, such as a zk-SNARK or zk-STARK. These
protocols prove that the transactions in a batch satisfy the rules of the protocol. These proofs are
submitted to the L1 chain and verified without needing further interaction.

An interactive method involves a back-and-forth process between parties to validate transactions. A
prominent example is the usage of fraud proofs, as used in optimistic rollups. If a dispute arises,

> a challenge mechanism is triggered, where a "prover" submits evidence (fraud proof) to demonstrate

Reviewer 3: I don't know if these are already deployed in prod, or just being worked on now, but it's possible to have non-interactive dispute mechanisms.

I'd frame this section differently, as fraud proofs vs. validity proofs, which is the standard terminology.

defender submitting data to the L1 chain.

Here below, the key differences between interactive and non-interactive methods.

| **Aspect**         | **Interactive**                                                                                                                                                                                  | **Non-Interactive**                                                                                                        |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Mechanism**      | Back-and-forth dispute resolution.                                                                                                                                                               | One-time proof submission and verification.                                                                                |

> | **Latency**        | Different time to finality depending on the technology, and mostly related to challenge periods. For instance, optimistic rollups can take a few hours while Polkadot rollups around 30 minutes. | Near-instant finality in theory. In practice ZK rollups can take hours to finalize. ZKsync for instance takes a whole day. |

Reviewer 3: The delay in validity rollup finality is not related to the technology used.
The delay is introduced artificially as "training wheels" - since this is still new tech and millions of $$ are secured there, they allow for some time for good old humans to intervene in case the social layer notices something being off, e.g. a ZK proof system having been broken.

| **Security Basis** | Crypto-economic incentives and monitoring by participants ensure validity.                                                                                                                       | Cryptographic proofs ensure correctness of all transactions upfront.                                                       |
| **Complexity**     | Simpler to implement but requires monitoring.                                                                                                                                                    | Computationally intensive and harder to build.                                                                             |
| **Use Cases**      | Broad compatibility with existing applications.                                                                                                                                                  | Best for high-security applications where instant finality is critical.                                                    |

Both approaches serve different needs and trade-offs, depending on the balance between scalability,
security, latency, and flexibility required.

> ### Zero-knowledge Rollups

Reviewer 3: If you really want to be picky, best to avoid the misleading term "ZK", since there is actually no zkSNARKs involved. These are just SNARKs.
But yeah the industry has kind of gotten used to calling them zk rollups

### Polkadot Rollups

Polkadot Rollups work similarly to optimistic rollups. They are an interactive method with fraud
proof mechanism. Very much like optimistic rollups and zk rollups are secured by Ethereum, Polkadot
rollups are secured by the Polkadot Relay Chain. The checking and fraud proof mechanics are
implemented on Polkadot, natively. [collators](./learn-collator.md), are in principle similar to
sequencers, as they pass data with a proof-of-validity (PoV) function for liveness and communication
with the Relay Chain.

Additionally, Polkadot operates as a _stateless client_ of its rollups, meaning the Relay Chain does
not maintain the full state of each parachain. Instead, it verifies state transitions using PoV
blocks submitted by collators. This is analogous to _block witnesses_ in the Ethereum ecosystem,
which prove transaction validity without requiring full state storage. This design ensures
scalability by delegating state maintenance to rollups while enabling secure validation through
cryptographic proofs.

Polkadot rollups have the following main differences compared to optimistic rollups:

> - Polkadot rollups can be fully-fledged state machine (usually in the form of a blockchain) with own

Reviewer 3: How is this different? Any rollup on Ethereum can implement any VM it wants to, incl. own logic governance etc.

Author: removed

  logic, governance mechanism, etc.
- Polkadot implements rollup functionality at the native level (i.e. without using L2 scaling
  solutions), allowing for shared security and scalability for each rollup through the
  [Parachains Protocol](./learn-parachains-protocol.md). Polkadot handles the coordination of data
  from parachains into an aggregated, representative state, somewhat similar to L2 rollups.

> - Each shard, or parachain, can be equipped with a unique state transition function (STF). This

Reviewer 3: Each L2 can also have its own STF - as outlined above they can run different VMs (implies different STF)

Author: removed

| **Scalability**              | Limited scalability as they are a single state machine and are only as scalable as the prover machine and computation requirement. Many zk-rollups disable cryptographic precompiles on mainnet as a result of the immense computational requirement for them. | High, with parallelization, but limited by gas costs on L1 chains like Ethereum.                                                                                             | Inherently scalable through native execution sharding and parachains operating in parallel. [Pipelining](./learn-async-backing.md) and [core scheduling](./learn-agile-coretime.md) increase throughput and scalability for the single rollup. Execution sharding is enabled by multiple virtual cores using [coretime](./learn-agile-coretime.md). |

> | **Decentralization**         | Centralization risks for sequencers and zk proof computation.                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Sequencer centralization risks; fewer validators can lead to potential censorship.                                                                                           | Collator decentralization is critical to ensure parachains remain trustless and independent.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer 3: Sequencer centralization risks are common problems to all rollups polkadot or not

Author: removed row

> | **Interoperability**         | Limited interoperability, often restricted to compatible L1s.                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Limited interoperability, often confined to the parent blockchain ecosystem. See the [comparison about interoperability](#interoperability-comparison) for more information. | Native interoperability through [XCM](./learn-xcm.md), allowing seamless communication between parachains having different logic. [Trustless bridges](./learn-bridges.md) can connect Polkadot to other blockchains.                                                                                                                                |

Reviewer 3: Teams are working on native interoperability within rollup hubs, e.g. rollups within the OP Stack ecosystem will have "better" interop than independent L2s.
How exactly it's going to work is TBD, but at least being worked on by multiple teams

> | **State Transition Logic**   | General-purpose but constrained by zk-circuit implementation complexity.                                                                                                                                                                                       | Can only support EVM state transitions with assumptions of optimistic validity since they have to be checked in the EVM environment<sup>1</sup>.                             | Each parachain can define its unique state transition function (STF), compiled to Wasm and validated per Parachain Protocol rules.                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer 3: Not true, optimistic rollups' opcodes aren't natively checked by the L1. Instead, the individual opcodes of the L2 are interpreted by the EVM.
One could equally implement the interpretation logic of other VMs aside from the EVM.

| **Development Complexity**   | Complex due to the mathematics of zero-knowledge proofs.                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Moderate complexity, requiring fraud-proof implementation.                                                                                                                   | Moderate to high complexity; parachain runtimes must be written in Wasm-compatible languages but can define custom logic and governance. Parachain maintainance can be an overhead.                                                                                                                                                                 |

> | **Data Availability**        | Requires posting minimal data proofs to L1.                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Posts complete data on-chain during challenge periods, increasing cost.                                                                                                      | Built-in data availability with validators ensuring distributed state storage and reconstruction in case of disputes.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 3: Data availability requirements posted by the optimistic and ZK rollups is precisely the same.
